I'm talking to Daniel Aaron here.
I'll just put this up here.
Don't even think about it.
It's just there.
All right.
I might check it periodically.
So you're saying you opened this memoir?
Yes.
Well, this is it.
I have some books here, which I'll show you, that were heard.
We had dozens of them.
But this is the kind of sort of thing at the Royclaw shop.
Yeah, these are famous.
He regarded her as his sort of foster daughter.
He called her the Whitman girl, things like that.
It's a sort of poor man's William Morris.
It's not quite right, you know.
It has an element of fakery, I think, in everything that he did.
something of the huckster, of the manufacturer.
Uh, yeah.
It's right in the back of the, uh, very nice.
One of one hundred.
Yes.
Yeah, just to be clear.
And, um... Yeah.
That was, it was a, and it's in a way, uh, I say now, looking back on it, uh, I guess my first introduction to American history.
Really?
Yeah, because of this thing he wrote, you know, the message to Garcia, which hundreds and hundreds of thousands of copies were printed.
And we all had to read it.
Yes.
You read it.
Did you ever read it?
Oh, absolutely.
In high school and perhaps.
Did you?
Definitely.
I was an English major in college.
I read it for sure.
Really?
I'm sure.
How else would I know it?
Well, it was red.
I mean, it was, you know, it was bruited.
It was all the big companies put it in their pay envelopes, and it was used by the Russian army and the German army for the soldiers.
Really?
Yes.
Just a small little pamphlet.
But what was it used there?
What was the function, do you think?
The function was?
See, this is the kind of thing I'm interested in.
Yes, this is the ... Are you going to mind, by the way, if I shoot a couple of pictures of you as well?
No.
There's a ... The quickest way to do it is to ...
I have a quotation from the, at the beginning of the book.
This is about my mother.
I have no idea when or where she met him.
My guess would be at Jane Adams's whole house in Chicago, or by what step she got to East Aurora, nor can I reconcile my mother's patron.
with the inspired author of the message to Garcia, 1899, that tough thumping track against sloth and incompetence, inspired by an incident in the Spanish-American War, and distributed in the millions by governments and industries around the world.
As Hubbard tells it, this is it, so this will save the time.
President McKinley, after many failures, at last finds the right man to deliver an important message to the commander of the human insurgents, General Garcia.
The young officer doesn't waste the president's time by asking him a lot of fool questions.
Jumped on the Cuban coast, he cuts through jungles, climbs mountains, evades Spanish troops.
Four weeks later, he locates Garcia.
A first message became a kind of media event and brought him international fame.
By the time I read it, serious social historians had written him off as an inspired quack and huster.
Uh...
To label him as snake oil salesman, however, should not discount his importance as a guide to the culturally insecure.
He had more than a touch of Benjamin Franklin and Phineas T. Barnum's sly impudence, and like them, used it to deflate his patronizers.
The audience he attracted and delighted lived somewhat beyond the pale of the cultural establishment.
It consisted largely of outsiders like himself, the intellectually alert and mildly nonconformist people of modern means, the self-educated graduates of Hubbard's alma mater, the University of Hard Knocks,
My private Albert Hubbard is still a shadowy composite of secondhand stories and fuzzy recollections.
Not the brassy public relations pioneer, but the friendly bookish man who invited my mother to join him and the other Raycrofters at work and play.
Something of the community's period charm and high-minded Victorianism emanates from the autographs and messages in my mother's album and from the volumes of our library signed by Fra Albertus himself.
That's great.
Yeah.
That's fascinating.
And actually, the theme of it is, in a way, will be how I became a kind of an Americanization of it.
I mean, coming from an immigrant background and then becoming part of the United States.
And that's the theme that goes all the way through it.
And then, of course, you pioneered this whole concept of American Studies.
Well, and I was one of them.
Well, well.
Yeah.
But nevertheless, this is quite... Yeah.
And it's everywhere you go now, American Studies is... Yeah.
Well, I think that's why I think The American is a good title for my book.
It's wonderful.
It's more to the point.
It's more to the point, yeah.
You know, where I have a title for my last book, Patience and Fortitude.
Some people think it's a Jane Austen novel.
Yeah, yeah.
What's Patience and Fortitude?
Well, that's it.
It's kind of an essayist take and Bush-ish kind of suggestion, people picking it up.
You expect to... Well, I don't know what you'd like, but I think The Americanist really is right on point.
It's wonderful.
I can't wait to see it.
And so you're pretty much finished up with it?
You're happy with it?
Well, I don't know.
It's a little bit, you know, the mountain laboring and producing the mouse.
I've been working on off and on for four or five years, going away from it coming back, redoing it, taking it all to pieces.
I call it a sort of the Penelopean method.
I take it down at night and reassemble it.
You'll see that phrase in my book.
That's excellent.
As an entry point into the conversation, you talk about becoming, the shaping, the creation of an Americanist, especially one who springs from immigrant roots.
How does reading play a role in this?
Well, because both my parents were readers, and the library was an important thing, and when we came to Los Angeles, and I was
six years old.
And, um, uh, my father was an invalid.
My mother became an invalid.
They died.
Yeah, we were young.
Yeah, we were in Chicago, yeah.
We died to ten.
And, uh, but my mother had been an invalid in a sanitarium, sanatorium in, um, California.
And, and my father had multiple sclerosis, and he died.
He held on for a year after she died.
But they were both dead by 1922.
Then I went to Chicago.
And then that was it.
My whole world was in the world of reading, because I think I never thought, I'm beginning to think about all these things I never thought about before.
I'm not being an orphan, for example, what it means, and compared to people with mothers and fathers.
Did you have any siblings?
Yeah.
We were broken apart, finally.
And we all went off by ourselves, pretty much.
Although we all cling together in our way.
Even though we were separated, we were very close.
And my oldest sister got a year ago, a year and a half ago.
That's 67.
And my, we're all 30, although my mother and father died very young.
There are three of us still.
All of us over 90.
Wow.
How old are you, might I ask?
I'm 92.
God bless you.
My father just passed away last year in 91.
Yeah.
And he was wonderful.
He lived a full life, healthy one day and gone the next.
Really?
Yeah.
What fine did he die of?
This is why we carry two tape recorders.
Okay, I'm sorry.
We were in Chicago and you were getting a book a week?
Yeah.
And you would discuss your reading with Mr. Solly, S-O-L-L-Y, and you were saying you were
Twelve to sixteen years old while you were there, and I was asking you about the kinds of books that you read.
Yeah, and I would read exploration books.
One thing, books on New Guinea, or books on Tibet, or things like that.
Well, then, all kinds of things.
And he gave me, when I graduated, a volume of Matthew Arnold's poetry.
I remember that.
But I was reading a lot, and I also, uh, interested in, well, reading all kinds of things.
And, uh, because I didn't get very much out of my Hyde Park High School, which is a public high school, which was in probably not very good shape then.
Teachers weren't being paid very well, you know.
And I, um, I have no reading memory of anything about Chicago High School, except that I was, didn't like it.
Did you keep any of these books?
I read in some piece about your research on articles, you really don't have an antiquarian bent to you.
I mean, you don't have any sense of the book as an object to be revered as an artifact.
No, no.
So you really didn't take any of these books with you, I guess.
No, all those books of my childhood, no.
There are little titles that I remember reading, and that—books that meant something to me, but they're nobody's books anybody ever heard of.
I was reading, you know, the kinds of books that you would read with a flashlight under the blanket sort of thing.
I remember when reading Ulysses, or trying to read it.
Come on.
Yeah.
My uncle had brought it back, a copy of it.
I think this was right around the time of its publication.
Yes, from Paris, before it was published in this country.
1922 in Paris, 1934 here.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But there were other books.
I was reading James Gibbons' Hunneker.
I suppose he was one of the most important guys for me, who was a very
a bombastic critic who wrote, was a friend and guide of Mencken, and wrote about the fantasy-like writers, and he was a kind of Bohemian and bon vivant, and wrote collections like Ivory Apes and Peacocks and things like that.
You wrote a novel called Painted Bails, did you ever see?
I haven't read it.
That got into the modern library.
But he was important for me as a guide.
I have his books.
Oh, well.
I really don't know how much time we have, so I want to kind of cut to it also in terms of this whole concept of the Library of America, which you are one of the co-founders and guiding spirits of.
And I guess Edmund Wilson has played a very prominent
You know, I gave a talk on Edwin Wilson.
At Clark.
I was traveling.
I couldn't make it.
I wish you'd been there.
I was giving a lecture myself at Ohio State University that day.
I couldn't cancel it, of course, but I really wanted to.
Well, it was fun, in a way.
I'm a past president of that board.
Oh, were you?
The president got his library clerk, so I knew all about it and really wanted to be there.
I just had another commitment that day.
It was too bad.
Well, he, of course, is a—I write about him, and I've written other things about him, and he's a very, very important influence on me and friend.
So I think of him along with Honecker, Mencken, as writers.
Perhaps you could just tell me a little bit about why he felt that the establishment of the Library of America.
Well, you know, he had always been interested in, when he was writing, doing his book, Patriotic Gore,
He was having problems getting copies of the books that he wanted to, to writers that he wanted to review, and found out they're just out of print.
So in Tauketville, his house in western New York, near Utica, he had this house where he had this collection of Americana.
The Wellfleet house was usually French, Italian, Latin, you know, Greek, things like that.
But this is America and the old Stonehouse.
And we used to talk about it.
I had a kind of interest in antiquarian feeling about certain writers and books.
And so we were always, in a sense, testing each other.
Have you read this?
I suppose you've read this.
No, you haven't.
You know, that kind of thing.
And so he had this idea.
He talked about this around 1960, of doing a kind of
democratic playard to do, to publish the American books in cheap copy editions.
Inexpensive.
Inexpensive, very inexpensive.
Those books are anything but cheap.
Exactly.
They're beautiful.
I have every one, by the way.
Have you?
No, no.
This is the, these were, his idea was that he didn't care about that.
The thing was to have them compact and the same shape size.
cheap paper.
He wasn't concerned about it.
He knew he couldn't do, say, a reel, the equivalent of the playa.
And so that was his plan, and he was trying to get it financed.
And he wanted me to come in and, you know, work with him on this, and to do, edit some of the, right, he'd got introductions.
He wanted little introductions, and I would do some of those.
and do eventually sets of William Gilmore Simms or something of that kind, you know, writers that are lost sighted, forgotten.
James Brant's Cabal of Keppel.
Exactly.
He had a special feeling for Keppel.
Yeah, he did.
He liked him.
But there were other writers that he was discovering, you know, that figured in patriotic lore.
Well, that fell through.
He couldn't get the money to do it, and a lot of other people or publishers were against it and everything else.
Why were they against it, these things?
Well, I mean, a lot of them— Fine.
He antagonized people.
So it was more Wilson than the other— Well, I think he could have probably ingratiated himself if he had been less brusque.
And you did have that side to him, didn't you?
Oh, yeah, absolutely.
Yes.
I'm multitasking, is that the thing you meant?
Yeah.
Go ahead, I'm reflecting on that.
Well, and that's—this is what—and he was very rough with people he disagreed with.
And I think that the publishers were not in favor of it.
They didn't want this kind of thing.
Or they were interested in getting scholarly editions with long introductions and these kind of, I've forgotten the name of the series now.
They published some of these books, these scholarly editions.
Nobody ever read them.
Doorstoppers, big clumsy books.
But there's something paradoxical here.
If we talk on the one hand of restoring to print the cornerstones of the American canon on the one hand, and yet they're out of print and nobody's reading them, how can something be canonical on the one hand and not be... He never thought of them as canonical.
That's another thing.
He wouldn't have used the word canon.
He wouldn't have.
No.
He wanted to get what Americans had written
forgotten Americans, writers who nobody ever heard of, but who were writing at a time and were saying interesting things that would be part of the American experience.
So he wanted the Forgotten, but the Library of America started with Poe, Hawthorne, Whitman, Emerson.
Yes, of course.
So it really did start with the candidate.
It did.
It had to, because we wouldn't have been able to get it funded.
And so he was dead, of course, before our first volume came out.
He would have liked it simply because these were well-made books, and they were well put together, and they were very well edited, you know, the kind of things that he would have been proud of.
But that wasn't what he had in mind.
He was not pretty interested in bookmaking or, you know, he just wanted to get books in print and make them available.
Forgotten books.
Yes, forgotten books, but get them back into print.
So who would decide which text?
He would decide.
I mean, there was no— This was not going to be a democratic thing.
No, not at all.
So, now this differs markedly from what you and your colleagues— Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
Tell me a bit about your concept, the one that we came in for twenty-eighths, two years or so ago.
The, the, the, uh, there were, of course, books that we published that were, had not been reprinted for a long time.
They were, uh, um, and, uh, they were in, uh, uh, sometimes, well,
They were hard to get at, hard to read.
You could still, for example, the main major writers, you could read.
I can't think of any American writer that wasn't, that we did, that was not available in any form.
But there's so much, they were in such bad shape, and badly edited, and full of mistakes,
No effort at all to do the kind of proper editorial work.
That would be tuned.
That, of course, was like the French playade, where those were impeccably done, you see.
So we tried to more or less imitate the playade French playade.
In terms of the editing.
In terms of the editing, and the quality of the paper, and all the rest of it, and the authoritativeness of it.
and he would have wanted this to do, was to do introductions.
I really miss the introduction.
Well, I was responsible, as much as anybody, for not having him.
Because my argument was that they date, so that somebody would be very enthusiastic and make some claims and so forth, and they would show what was in fashion at that moment when this was done,
And there would be the idiosyncrasies, you see.
I thought, no, have the text.
Let people come and read the text.
Give them the information they need.
Give them the chronologies.
The chronologies are wonderful.
And the state of the text and where it comes from.
That's it.
Don't have introductions.
Most introductions.
I haven't thought of that, of course.
I'm reading it from the standpoint of my generation.
Yes, yes.
But I also think in terms, you are trying to create something that will be timeless.
Sure.
And somebody comes to this text 50 or 75 years from now, and they say, well, look at, well, they got this all along, didn't they?
Yeah, that's right.
And they kind of dismiss the text itself.
Yeah.
And some of the writers were, things seemed a little like Mark Twain.
Well, there was a kind of a Mark Twain industry that was beginning, but it was still very academic, and it was very hard to bring this together.
And our texts of Mark Twain, I think, are wonderful, because all that kind of scholarship has been incorporated, but without any of what— The apparatus of the Berkeley stuff.
Well, what I think— What Wilson called barbed wire.
Oh, barbed wire.
Yeah.
His attacks against these scholarly additions.
antagonize the academic profession.
How do you weigh in on that?
Well, the thing is that I've tried to flake it.
I was in both, you see.
And one of the things to do was to win over these editors who were doing the scholarly editions.
The MLA.
Yes, the MLA.
They were the ones that had to be wooed.
And if we were going to get the funding for the
the National Endowment of the Humanities.
And there was, they, this group opposes ferociously, and the whole story has not been told.
I have kept a record of it, and I've just given it now, almost day-to-day, play-by-play account of this, which eventually will be written, which is now, you can't tease me with a little bit of it?
Can you tease me with a little bit of it?
Just about what
How fractious was this?
What was it?
Very, very fractious.
And was it basically protecting turf, or did it— Partly.
They were doing their own additions, and they— On one level, it was petty, on the one hand.
Well, they didn't say it was petty.
They just felt that they were guaranteeing quality and what right—we to come in.
They had invested all this time and money.
And with the professionals, these were the amateurs.
Well, they couldn't say it.
Any of you?
Yeah, sort of.
But the thing is, they never got these different books out.
They would take them two or three years before one of the volumes would come out.
They had committees and everything, and then these great, big, huge, bulky volumes, which nobody would read.
Amazing.
And they gradually saw it.
I mean, the whole story of Wilson on the MLA has been—he's written essays on this, you know.
But any of that.
So, if you could talk generally about how something is recognized as being canonical.
We say that this is the American literary canon.
Okay, and I guess now that if it makes it to the Library of America, it does have that kind of authority.
Yes, I mean, although that is gradually dissipating because we're published through so many books that are not technically in the canon.
I mean, if you do detective stories, if you do baseball, if you do, well, that's not, those, by the way, those books aren't in our series.
They're not in a separate series.
They're separate, that's right.
But we have published books in the series that would, well, for example, would people put
Uh, Steinbeck in the canon?
I love Steinbeck.
Yeah, well, yeah.
But you see people, different things.
The, uh, uh... What is the canon?
I mean... Well, what is the canon indeed?
You know, like the guy who's been around for six or seven decades.
Yeah.
And people are reading him appreciatively, uh, so...
What are we talking about?
Yes, it's a very hard concept, really, to work out, and it's conferred by a group of people who decide they're going to be the ones to determine.
Your colleague Helen, right next floor, I asked her this very same question.
I said, how does someone become canonical?
And she said, other writers.
And that's right.
Yes, I think that's the answer.
The approbation of other writers over a period of time, and it's hard to dispute that.
Yes, I think she's right.
Can you more or less give a sense of the arc of your own reading over your lifetime?
Has it followed an arc, or has it been...?
I certainly would say that my reading has not been shaped by the canon.
I just read everything under the sun.
We read trash, you know.
That was part of it.
Did you ever see this little book, American Notes, that I did?
Yes.
That little introduction there about my reading, that has a lot of I got.
A few years ago, I guess.
Yeah.
Yeah, that has a lot in it about me and my work.
So you say it really is an eclectic kind of
Well, of course, I think as you get older you hear about writers and things.
I, you, and you go, you have spells.
For example, I find now more and more that I'm not reading contemporary writers.
I don't follow them.
I do, every so often I do, when it's very much in the news.
Say Philip Roth's new book or something of that kind.
But I've been spending this last year re-reading, but in a kind of a different way and much more carefully, Proust.
You're not an American, right?
No, no.
And there are not many, no.
So you go back, so continue, you're re-reading Proust.
Yes, yes.
And I read very slowly.
Satisfaction, might I ask?
I think he's the greatest writer.
Now, are you reading him in Moncrief or are you reading him in French?
I'm reading in Moncrief.
I couldn't.
My French is— So, Proust's mockery for you is Proust.
That's right.
Interesting concept, too, isn't it?
It is.
Alas, I have to say, because—but I knew that I wouldn't be able to read it.
I couldn't read—I mean, just the vocabulary, the—there's so many different vocabularies in remembrance of things past—scientific,
See, just by calling it Remembrance of Things Past makes it an English book, doesn't it?
Yes, yes, yes, yes, that's right.
So does the translation become a new work of art in its own way?
Yes, I think so, because I know now that the translation is only one man's impression.
But to me, I think I understand Proust now in a way that I—you read
for a year, ten pages a night less, and read, and read, and read, and read, and read it in a certain way.
I've never read a book like this.
It took my wife a year and a half to read books.
Really?
But with great satisfaction, she enjoyed it, she savored it.
And she really doesn't, she likes nonfiction.
So therefore she wouldn't qualify, by the way.
You know this NEA report that says reading is in decline?
You saw this report a couple of weeks ago.
But that's only if you read fiction, you know.
Like my wife who reads biography and reads the kind of material that you write, she wouldn't matter because she's not reading Daniel Steele, for instance.
I think what I find that taking most of my time now, and I am a little alarmed by that because I read the TLS.
every week.
I read the London Review of Books.
I read the New York Review of Books.
Just, I read the Los Angeles Times book page.
Just, I don't read the New Republic anymore, although I used to write for it.
Just reading those books takes quite a bit of time, you know.
I don't read.
And then there's certain
articles written, scholarly articles written by friends of mine, and that are calling attention to, oh, is this a new essay, a collection of D. H. Florence and the big edition on the studies of classic American literature and the whole history of that.
It was fascinating, one long article.
things that come in and interrupt.
And I don't think I read systematically now.
Do you have a pile?
I have piles of things, yeah.
Do you read a lot of things simultaneously?
Yeah.
That's the way I like to read.
Yeah, I was there.
Or if something put it down.
Yeah, that's right.
If I travel for three days, I take four books and I'm nuts.
Yeah.
put one down and you pick the other one up.
And I write that way.
I have all my chakras moving simultaneously, like a phalanx, you know, and I go from this one to that one and go back to that.
And the idea is that they all end at the same time, you know, that you reach that point.
And you write with a computer.
Yeah, how about yourself?
Yeah, I don't, and that's the thing.
I should have done it ten years ago, and it may have made a big difference, but I can't.
I have to write
with pencil and paper at first.
I like the feeling of it.
I like the sentences.
There's the tactility to it.
Yes, and there's the notion of seeing just something come out.
Even sometimes after I've typed something, I will rewrite it in pencil.
That's wonderful.
You know, you talk about going back to choosing to reread
So perhaps, I asked Harold Bloom this question, my sister laughed, and I said, is there anything you've ever wanted to read that you haven't read that remains unwritten?
He said, my, what an interesting question.
He said, nobody's ever asked that.
I mean, I can think of thousands of books that I'll probably never get to read.
He claims to have read everything he's ever thought.
I suppose he does come close to it in some ways, but there's a great deal of it.
But the next point was, he said, it's choosing what to reread.
That's interesting.
And you've kind of just touched on that.
So thinking, you know, here you are, you're in your 90s now.
Is that a big decision, choosing what to go back and to read this?
I think so.
And I think it's so wonderful for Foust, you see, because it's going into, it's diving into an ocean.
And this is, there's so many things that occur to me as I read this.
I'm trying to think of who will I do after that.
One writer that I read that way for a period, some years ago, was Robert Musel.
He's a man without qualities, you know.
Quite a book.
Yeah.
Quite an unknown book.
Remarkably, I think.
Yeah.
To me, it's a wonderful book.
I haven't.
I haven't done it.
Uh-huh.
Yeah.
Sorry.
Go ahead.
Yeah.
Well.
Did you enjoy it?
Yeah.
See, I keep journals, and I keep excerpts, and I copy things.
Yeah, and my journals are full of, when I was reading extracts from Mosul.
Earlier, I started out when I was 16, 17, and I was reading Huisemont's.
large extracts of sort of heavy, fantasiac stuff.
Bombastic, romantic, uh, solipsistic, you know, just looking back at myself in those days.
Um, the, um, my teacher, who I would allot to at Ann Arbor, named Eric Walter,
who first introduced me to James, Virginia Woolf.
But when I was a freshman, he said, uh, Aaron, you're word drunk.
I'd try everything, you see.
So it was terrible stuff, but I'd try and, every time I'd look at a word, I'd, uh, I'd want to use it and find ways of doing it.
So that it was the most, the art was ridiculous.
writing you could possibly imagine.
But I still am interested in words.
So these journals, these were reading journals?
Reading journals.
And then you kept them over all these?
Yes.
So those you kept.
You haven't kept the books, but you kept the journals.
I kept the journals.
Did you go into the journals?
Here it is?
Yeah.
For this book, I did.
I used it a lot.
And so you see perceptions as you had several decades ago.
More.
Sometimes I'm ashamed of them, but I had to say to myself, no, everything that you did was you, because you felt this way at the time.
So you can't go against yourself when you show all your ridiculousness and posture and all that kind of thing.
No.
That's part of them.
Did you feel that when you were doing these journals that you were writing them for yourself or for another reader?
Well, you know, I always had a feeling at the time, as any young writer, who knows, eventually, posterity may discover these things, you see.
You're talking to the man who did the Inman Diary.
Yes, quick.
This is, yes.
But, gradually, it became much, very soon, I'm very glad to say, it became less a diary than a commonplace book.
It's my recordings, my reading, my quotations, all kinds of things that I have.
And some of them I find terribly entertaining and amusing.
And I've kept a big one now that I use, and it's a ... That's one of them right there, huh?
Journals of trips abroad in China, a place of this kind.
Here's a man who made a big impression on me, and I read everything I can.
Lichtenberg.
Did you ever read Lichtenberg's Aphorisms?
No, I haven't.
Oh, well.
He's wonderful.
And this is one of your ... This is ...
This is young me when I was starting out.
Wow.
There was quite a nice piece of Mark Feeney, you wrote a couple of years back.
Yeah.
I had no idea that you had crossed paths with so many extraordinary people over your lifetime in Korea.
Well, I don't write about that as much as
A lot of people think I should have.
JFK was your student.
Betty Friedan was your student.
She acknowledged you in that Feminine Mystique book that she did, apparently.
Who?
Betty Friedan.
Really?
From Smith.
Yeah, I remember that.
She apparently acknowledged your contribution to her development of this Feminine Mystique, so don't forget that.
When you talk about really touching people as a
I keep aphorisms, I think, that are terribly important to me.
So this book that you're holding right here— This is, to me, a fascinating book.
I love it, because it's—yes, I read it with great interest.
That's your book, right?
This is my book.
I want to just take a picture of you looking at it, if I like.
Do I?
This is the kind of thing that I do, which is sort of, see, I thought of names for hurricanes.
Why not have terrible names for hurricanes instead of the Betty, Susie?
They really have to give up.
They're frightful things.
Why should we?
Yes.
So here are my name stories.
Do you want me to take a picture?
Go ahead.
For hurricanes.
I can even see the pictures that I'm taking.
I never thought I'd go digital, but here we are.
So what are some of the names that you have there?
Attila, Ahab, Elis, Beelzebub, Caesar, Demogorgon, Erebus, Fafner, Goliath, Hannibal, Iago, Jupiter, Khomeini, Loki, Mussolini, McCarthy, Macedon, Medusa, Milosevic, Napoleon, Nebuchadnezzar, Odin, Pol Pot, Polyphemus, Pizarro,
Pinochet, Gaddafi, Quasimodo, Quilp, Ragnarok, Rossier, Reagan, Ronald, Sherman, Stalin, Salon, Saloni, Shiva, Thor, Ukuleina, Villa, Van Malki, Votran, Vulcan, Wotan, Xanthippe, Xerxes, Ymir.
First of all, the giants of chaos.
I've got a Z. Oh, you'll have to get a Z.
Are you familiar with the Pricking in the Mind of Man exhibition in London in 1963?
Yeah.
Very famous.
They picked 440 books.
If they didn't change the world, at least they occasioned things.
They made things happen.
Of course, the obvious ones like Copernicus and Isaac Newton and Darwin and Freud.
There's very little fiction in there, and yet, you know, Pilgrim's Progress is in there.
It's just one of my favorite books.
Such an influential book.
The Utopia, of course, is a work of fiction.
The Arnold Tom's cabin, Lincoln, you know, might be apocryphal, but he says, so this is the little woman who created this.
If it didn't happen, it should have happened.
Yes, that's right.
Do you think that it is possible for
literature to, if not change the world, but to make things happen?
I don't think literature ever changes the world.
I think that it can give the world a nudge.
I like that.
And you think still?
Yes.
Even people are going to these things now for their .
.
Yes, it's harder now because there's so much noise going on and there's so many influence things that are coming from all directions.
So it's hard to think of a book.
You have to have the right occasion.
Even something like The Grapes of Wrath came at a certain time, you know.
But many books that are always called the Uncle Tom's Cabin of this, books that change people's minds, that kind of thing.
Were they too simplistic, do you think?
Of course, it's bound to be simplistic.
I mean, many of the things that were, you know, regarded as one's books of that kind are now forgotten.
Can you think of any of them?
Progress and Poverty.
I didn't know it.
Progress and Poverty was written by a single-tax man.
Jesus.
What is it, Progress and Poverty?
Progress and Poverty.
Poverty.
Oh, Christ.
I think it's great that you can't... Oh, no.
My mind now is... It shows how it's kind of fallen into a... No, no, no, no.
It has nothing to do with that.
It's simply that my mind is... I can't remember my best friend's name.
Oh.
Yeah.
I mean, it's something like that.
You have a legendary memory.
Well, I have a... This is what's happening.
Henry George.
Do you never read of Progress and Poverty?
I'm embarrassed, no.
Well, what, what, what, what, the Proximity, what is it he wrote?
Well, he wrote this in, in the 1870s.
1870s.
He, he was, he, he was the, the theory of the single tax.
There was a notion that if you had one single tax, and it was on land, and under, on an increment, you could pay for everything.
It was a kind of a, a, a kind of utopian idea.
But everybody knew about him and wrote about him.
There's a wonderful essay by George Bernard Shaw, first hearing Henry George speak in London.
And Edward Bellamy, of course, well, he and George were contemporaries.
Oh, by the way, I think that Proverbs and Properties is an extraordinary book as a piece of writing.
Yeah.
I'll go check it out.
I have an essay in this book, Men of Good Hope.
Men of Good Hope.
That's my first book.
I have access to all your books, by the way.
Yeah, well, this is a... I used to come in here and do a lot of reading at Widener, which is great.
But it's still a trip in.
But they've given me full privileges of Holy Cross and Clark.
So between the two of them, I get pretty much everything I'm looking for, maybe 98%.
I'm sure.
If you're looking for some kind of special thing, but no.
All right, we'd go to the Athenaeum, which is the best $200.
It's up to $200,000.
Is it cost it now?
$100.
I used to go there.
I had a privilege to be given the right to look at it.
That's a wonderful place to read.
It really is.
I think one of the great reading rooms anywhere.
So we're talking again about what you say.
You think that books can give history a nudge, if not certainly change it outright.
Do you think this is...
You've seen any examples of this over the last thirty or forty years?
I wonder why To Kill a Mockingbird.
There's a book that even became a great film.
Yes.
And look at that book.
Now, I wonder if you just took a freshman class coming to Harvard, who would presumably read a little bit more than most kids do.
They don't, really, I don't think.
I wonder.
I don't think there would be.
And even much greater writers, in my opinion, that were tremendously important to me, but nobody reads.
Santayana.
There are a whole series of books—I wrote a piece on this once—by famous writers who try novels, but they're not novelists.
But they write interesting books that aren't novels, like Santayana's novel The Last Puritan.
or Lionel Trilling's The Middle of the Journey, or some other books.
They're extremely interesting as works of great writers and minds.
But they're not fiction.
They're something else.
Well, is there something missing in your view?
Well, they're just not writers.
They're not novelists.
And everybody, you can be a good writer and not necessarily write novels.
And interesting books are written that are technically novels, by non-novelists.
That happens.
Can you articulate what a great novel requires for you to perceive its themes?
Well, it's hard to do.
And I wouldn't, I'd have to go back and stop looking and see what did I say then.
I just have this feeling that, say, to me, Anna Karenina is a great novel.
Novels that simply come out of life and take on a kind of a life of their own, and they continue to vibrate, you know, and live
They take on a permanence, simply like some kind of organism, and that's what happens.
That's the quote I came here to get, I think.
That quotation that you just gave me is wonderful.
Thank you.
Your colleague, Robert Coles, in all of the courses he teaches at Harvard, it's all fiction.
I mean, he teaches medical students, or business school students,
how to become better physicians or whatever by asking them to read Tulsa or Middlemarch.
I think that's kind of what you're saying in a way.
Yes, I haven't given it much thought.
Any of that.
So, where do you think you'd like to see the library?
When it first arrived, they were talking a hundred books.
Thankfully, they've gone beyond that in terms of... Yes, it's become, because it's not... It's this word, classics, you see.
The Library of the Math doesn't have classics in the title.
Although the founding entity was literary classics.
It was.
But I think it is, this has become now, I don't know, what would be sort of memorable Americana, books that reflect a time, an idea, a period.
Books that are, of course, they have to be, the set criterion has to be well written.
to have had some kind of literary influence.
Those usually go into it.
But if you look at some of the ... I don't know, you know, what do you think about Philip Roth?
Do you think he belongs in the Library of America?
I like him.
I like him a great deal.
I like him better than Upton, just in terms of
I really like Updike.
I don't mean any disrespect.
Yes.
Well, again, you see, I think that probably... But I didn't answer your question.
No, I think probably you're right.
I think that there's something wonderfully accomplished about Updike, and so Barry has so many things he's good at.
To me,
The uptick I most admire is the uptick of the Rabbit series.
Fabulous.
Yeah.
That's the high point for me.
But of course he has many, many other... And you know, if he had done nothing else, that would be okay.
Absolutely.
That would be fine.
That's right.
The Rabbit books alone make a reputation.
And they got better.
That's right.
Rabbit is Rich, I thought, was just, you know, that was the third one.
That was just an extraordinary book.
Yes, I think that he's never equaled at that.
At least to me, that is the very best.
And he's... See, he's just terribly intelligent.
He's quite a reader, I think.
I think he's quite a reader, too.
That's right, he is.
As is Roth, by the way.
I know, yeah.
I'm sorry, I interrupted you.
No, it's just... I think if you were to ask up today,
what he would aspire to be as a writer?
He'd say a poet.
Well, you know, I did, I always liked his poetry when he first came out at the Queens that he did for magazines, New Yorker magazine and so forth.
Some satirical and light verse, which he did with a great deal of skill and charm.
He does a lot of art criticism now.
Which is excellent.
And I guess it's good.
I don't, I don't really
I read his stuff when Trot brings out the volumes, the collected stuff, which is kind of a nice way to do it.
He's a tough guy to keep up with.
I think that he'll certainly be in the Library of America.
To me, in some ways, well, I don't want to make any invidious
comparisons, but I think the rabbit books fit in my conception with the Library of America as some... Just continue with the product, you would.
Well, even more than, in some ways, than Saul Bellow, although these are special things that I have always been a great admirer of Bellow, and have read him
the way I've read few contemporary writers.
I think of Updeck as being somehow a little more autochthonous American writer.
What was that word again?
Autochthonous.
You know, of the natural coming out.
For example, and this is just between us, I don't want to make any kind of comparisons between writers, particularly.
That's very interesting that you point that out.
Yes.
And I won't.
Yeah.
For example, Singer.
Now, they've published three Singer books in the Library of America.
And he doesn't write even in English.
He writes about this kind of American Jewish world.
Seems still, I still don't see that he fits in it, but he is.
So do you have these meanings?
I no longer am, I'm only emeritus.
I have nothing to do now with what is selected or anything like that.
I talk to people, and I'm always asked and kept in touch with things and so forth.
And I think many people have to see this as an ongoing operation.
How are we going to sell books?
What's going to be popular?
So, it becomes that kind of less pure.
Well, there's a element of commerce involved.
That's exactly.
And just to wake and wrap it up, because I know you've been very generous with your time, do you prefer the word classic to canon than looking at the big picture?
I don't like the word canon.
Especially where it comes from Scripture, almost, you know, talking about sacred texts.
Exactly.
I don't like the word canon.
And classic is a very dubious word for me.
unless you do it with a certain kind of quotation mark.
What is classic American literature?
Well, D. H. Lawrence's studies in classic American literature were his—who were the people he wrote about?
Craig Kerr?
Cooper?
I love Cooper.
I have a very special feeling about Cooper.
The first American writer, probably, do you think?
Well, again, I would hesitate to use these things, because when does American literature start becoming American literature?
He's certainly one of the most self-conscious.
And I love his book, The American Democrats, and a certain kind of
I've been a general liberal in my point of view, but I've also been extremely interested in American conservatism of a certain kind.
And he represents to me that quality.
You've been very generous with your time.
Well, I mean, we haven't had a chance to talk like this.
I mean, I hope I haven't gassed too much.
You must be... I could talk forever.
It's just, I don't want to impose in your hospitality.
It's a great tape.
What I'd like to do is go back and transcribe it, and then maybe follow up if there are a few areas that we can, if you'd like to go over.
Would you like to see any quotes of yours that I use?
I have to say I'm very, very
I've never had anyone... The only thing that I'm concerned with is appearing to be important, appearing to be... Yeah, not appearing.
I'm here, because I feel it's really important, as do, you know, thousands of your admirers.
My editor at Harper's is
So thrilled that I had you on my short list of people.
I can understand that.
He went to Harvard.
He certainly knows, his name is Hugh Van Dusen.
I don't know if you ever heard of him.
He's Jacques Barsen's editor at Harvard.
He still is.
That book that just came out a couple of years ago that was a huge bestseller.
Do you know what I mean?
Yeah.
It's a big, big book.
That's right.
He's the oldest writer to ever make the New York Times bestseller list.
And quite pointedly, without any illustrations, he said, I want it just
I was telling, in fact, my editor is also Harper Lee's editor, although she hasn't published the book, you know, that one book.
And I was telling him how a copy of To Kill a Mockingbird sold for $33,000 at Christie's sale.
This was a few years ago, the first edition.
And he said, do you know how many copies of that book we sell a year?
This is harmless.
Now, obviously, paperback.
Take a wild guess.
This is her editor at Harford Stock.
Sorry, this is not 5,000.
How about 250,000 copies a year?
Quarter of a million copies a year that book sells.
Amazing paperbacks.
Every school reads them.
Every public school, the course, they'll do a thing on whether
or whatever, or whether it's a great novel, it's read everywhere.
And he said, we do 200.